# Problem Set 6

## **What to Do**

Did you start CS50x in 2021 or prior? Be sure to **[follow these instructions](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/new/#did-you-start-cs50x-in-2021-or-earlier)** if you haven’t already!

1. Log into [code.cs50.io](https://code.cs50.io/) using your GitHub account
2. Run `update50` in your codespace’s terminal window to ensure your codespace is up-to-date.
3. Submit [Hello](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Hello%20Python%20bc8e288bbdb04638adf119e473ba2823.md) in Python
4. Submit one of:
    - [this version of Mario in Python](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Mario%20less%20python%203233a677a1f94a1aa6baeb396d0a932a.md), if feeling less comfortable
    - [this version of Mario in Python](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Mario%20more%20python%20d370ba9c6f8d435ab35a5d0da664d293.md), if feeling more comfortable
5. Submit one of:
    - [Cash](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Cash%20python%2091e0f86452cc44448bf2e41ebf545b4f.md) in Python, if feeling less comfortable
    - [Credit](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Credit%20python%202c7697d108a24f5bb27a6ae9fca191b4.md) in Python, if feeling more comfortable
6. Submit [Readability](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/Readability%20python%20db4b82c1f7ac48689bdbe676fbacf980.md) in Python
7. Submit [DNA](../ProblemSets%204c4bcc2cf3cd425382614733495f6ba8/DNA%20b1e5595a056f49cd9edcbd15403508a6.md) in Python

If you submit both versions of Mario, we’ll record the higher of your two scores. If you submit both Cash and Credit, we’ll record the higher of your two scores.

## **When to Do It**

By Sunday, January 1, 2023, 10:29 AM GMT+5:30.

## **Advice**

- Try out any of David’s programs from [Week 6](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2022/weeks/6/).

## **Academic Honesty**

- For Hello, Mario, Cash, Credit, and Readability, it is **reasonable** to look at your own implementations thereof in C and others’ implementations thereof *in C*.
- It is **not reasonable** to look at others’ implementations of the same *in Python*.
- Insofar as a goal of these problems is to teach you how to teach yourself a new language, keep in mind that these acts are not only **reasonable**, per the syllabus, but encouraged toward that end:
    - Incorporating a few lines of code that you find online or elsewhere into your own code, provided that those lines are not themselves solutions to assigned problems and that you cite the lines’ origins.
    - Turning to the web or elsewhere for instruction beyond the course’s own, for references, and for solutions to technical difficulties, but not for outright solutions to problem set’s problems or your own final project.